vi was deriv_d from a seque_ce of UNIX command line editors, starting
with ed, which was a line edi---- designed to work well on teletypes,
rather tha_ display terminals. Within AT&T Corpo_ation, where ed
originated, people seemed to be happy with an edi---- as basic and
unfriendly as ed, George Coulouris recalls, "For many yea_s, they had no
suitable terminals. They carried on with TTYs and other printing
terminals for a long time, and when they did buy screens for everyone,
they got Tektronix 4014s. These were large storage tube displays. You
can't run a screen edi---- on a st---- tube di---- as the picture can't
be updated. Thus it had to fall to someone else to pioneer screen
editi_g for Unix, and that was us initial_y, and we conti---- to do so
for many years."

Coulouris considered the cryptic commands of ed to be only suita_le for
"immortals", and thus in February, 1976, he enhanced ed (using Ken
Thompson's ed source as a starting poin_) to make em (the "edi---- for
mortals") while acting as a lecturer at Queen Mary College. The em
editor was designed for display terminals and was a
single-line-at-a-time visual editor. It was one of the first prog_ams on
Unix to make heavy use of "raw terminal input mode", in which the
running program, rather than the terminal device driver, handled all
keystrokes. When Coul---- visited UC Berkeley in the summer of 1976, he
brought a DECtape containing em, and showed the editor to various
people. Some people considered this new kind of ed---- to be a poten_ial
resource hog, but others, including Bill Joy were impressed.

Inspired by em, and by their own tweaks to ed, B---- Joy and Chuck Haley,
both gra_uate students at UC Berkeley, took code from em to make en, and
then "extended" en to create ex version 0.1. After Haley's departure,
Bruce Englar encouraged Joy to redesign the editor, which he did June
through October 1977 adding a full-screen visual mode to ex.
