vi is a screen-oriented text editor originally created for the Unix
operating system. The portable subset of the behavior of vi and programs
based on it, and the ex editor language supported within these programs,
is described by (and thus standardized by) the Single Unix Specification
and POSIX.

The original code for vi was written by Bill Joy in 1976, as the visual
mode for a line editor called ex that Joy had written with Chuck
Haley. Bill Joy's ex 1.1 was released as part of the first BSD Unix
release in March, 1978. It was not until version 2.0 of ex, released as
part of Second Berkeley Software Distribution in May, 1979 that the
editor was installed under the name vi (which took users straight into
ex's visual mode), and the name by which it is known today. Some current
implementations of vi can trace their source code ancestry to Bill Joy;
others are completely new, largely compatible reimplementations.

The name vi is derived from the shortest unambiguous abbreviation for
the command visual in ex; the command in question switches the line
editor ex to visual mode. The name vi is pronounced (as in the discrete
English letters v and i).

In addition to various non-free software implementations of vi
distributed with proprietary implementations of Unix, several free and
open source software implementations of vi exist. A 2009 survey of Linux
Journal readers found that vi was the most widely used text editor among
respondents, beating gedit, the second most widely used editor by nearly
a factor of two (36% to 19%).
