vi was derived from a sequence of UNIX command line editors, starting
with ed, which was a line editor designed to work well on teletypes,
rather than display terminals. Within AT&T Corporation, where ed
originated, people seemed to be happy with an editor as basic and
unfriendly as ed, George Coulouris recalls, "For many years, they had no
suitable terminals. They carried on with TTYs and other printing
terminals for a long time, and when they did buy screens for everyone,
they got Tektronix 4014s. These were large storage tube displays. You
can't run a screen editor on a storage tube display as the picture can't
be updated. Thus it had to fall to someone else to pioneer screen
editing for Unix, and that was us initially, and we continued to do so
for many years."

Coulouris considered the cryptic commands of ed to be only suitable for
"immortals", and thus in February, 1976, he enhanced ed (using Ken
Thompson's ed source as a starting point) to make em (the "editor for
mortals") while acting as a lecturer at Queen Mary College. The em
editor was designed for display terminals and was a
single-line-at-a-time visual editor. It was one of the first programs on
Unix to make heavy use of "raw terminal input mode", in which the
running program, rather than the terminal device driver, handled all
keystrokes. When Coulouris visited UC Berkeley in the summer of 1976, he
brought a DECtape containing em, and showed the editor to various
people. Some people considered this new kind of editor to be a potential
resource hog, but others, including Bill Joy were impressed.

Inspired by em, and by their own tweaks to ed, Bill Joy and Chuck Haley,
both graduate students at UC Berkeley, took code from em to make en, and
then "extended" en to create ex version 0.1. After Haley's departure,
Bruce Englar encouraged Joy to redesign the editor, which he did June
through October 1977 adding a full-screen visual mode to ex.
